AMERICAN JOURNAL
of POLITICAL SCIENCE

Social Networks and Protest Participation: Evidence
from 130 Million Twitter Users @ G

Jennifer M. Larson
Jonathan Nagler
Jonathan Ronen
Joshua A. Tucker

Vanderbilt University
New York University
Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology
New York University

Abstract: Pinning down the role of social ties in the decision to protest has been notoriously elusive, largely due to data
limitations. Social media and their global use by protesters offer an unprecedented opportunity to observe real-time social
ties and online behavior, though often without an attendant measure of real-world behavior. We collect data on Twitter
activity during the 2015 Charlie Hebdo protest in Paris, which, unusually, record real-world protest attendance and network
structure measured beyond egocentric networks. We devise a test of social theories of protest that hold that participation
depends on exposure to others’ intentions and network position determines exposure. Our findings are strongly consistent
with these theories, showing that protesters are significantly more connected to one another via direct, indirect, triadic, and
reciprocated ties than comparable nonprotesters. These results offer the first large-scale empirical support for the claim that
social network structure has consequences for protest participation.

Replication Materials: The data and materials required to verify the computational reproducibility of the results,
procedures and analyses in this article are available on the American Journal of Political Science Dataverse within the
Harvard Dataverse Network, at: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/RLLLIV.

» n January 7, 2015, gunmen killed 12 people
_ at the offices of the French satirical magazine

~ Charlie Hebdo. Four days after the terrorist attack, millions took to the streets in protest. That a protest
took place in response to such a tragedy is not puzzling.
However, any individual’s choice of behavior that day, the
sum of which aggregated into a large-scale protest, is puzzling, and relates to a larger question with wide-reaching
implications for the social sciences: Why do some decide
to attend a protest while others do not, and how do they
arrive at this decision?

Despite how foundational this question is to an
understanding of protests and collective action more
broadly, how consequential protests can be given their
role in policy change and the overthrow of govern
ments, and how salient the topic has become due to the
worldwide wave of twenty-first-century protests, the answer remains elusive.

The problem concerns data. Conventional wisdom
suggests that an individual’s decision to protest depends
on the decisions of others in her social network, a logic
that underlies much of the existing theory on protest
(Centola 2013; Chwe 2000; Granovetter 1978; Kim and
Bearman 1997; Marwell, Oliver, and Prahl 1988; Siegel
2009). However, tests of this wisdom require data that
are fundamentally difficult to collect. Traditional methods entail tracking down protest participants after the fact
and rely on their recall of behavior and ex ante motivations. To precisely test theoretical claims about networks,
researchers must measure a full set of ties—protesters’ ties

Jennifer M. Larson is Associate Professor, Department of Political Science, Vanderbilt University, 230 Appleton Place, Nashville, TN 37203
(jennifer.larson@vanderbilt.edu). Jonathan Nagler is Professor, Department of Politics, New York University, 19 W. 4th Street, New York,
NY 10012 (jonathan.nagler@nyu.edu). Jonathan Ronen is PhD Fellow, Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology, Max Delbrtick Center
for Molecular Medicine, Robert-Réssle StraBe, Berlin, Germany 13125 (yablee@gmail.com). Joshua A. Tucker is Professor, Department of
Politics, New York University, 19 W. 4th Street, New York, NY 10012 (joshua.tucker@nyu.edu).

The data were collected by the NYU Social Media and Political Participation (SMaPP) laboratory (https://wp.nyu.edu/smapp/), of which
Nagler and Tucker are co-directors along with Richard Bonneau and John T. Jost. The SMaPP lab is supported by the INSPIRE program
of the National Science Foundation (Award SES-1248077), the New York University Global Institute for Advanced Study, the Moore-Sloan
Data Science Environment, and Dean Thomas Carew’s Research Investment Fund at New York University.

American Journal of Political Science, Vol. 63, No. 3, July 2019, Pp. 690-705

©2019, Midwest Political Science Association DOI: 10.1111/ajps.12436

690SOCIAL NETWORKS AND PROTEST PARTICIPATION

to other protesters, ties to nonprotesters, ties of ties—as
well as the protest behavior, usually relayed secondhand,
of everyone. Collecting this kind of information is errorprone and expensive, often prohibitively so in the context
of protests. Consequently, few empirical studies to date
consider the role of social networks in protest participation, and those that do are highly limited.'

We overcome this limitation by collecting data on
Twitter use during the Charlie Hebdo protest.” Social media use generates an observable record of social ties that is
complete on the platform and unfiltered by the memory
ofa respondent. Our data include user geolocation, which
indicates physical presence or absence at the protest. Although others have explored the relationship between
networks among Twitter users and online protest behavior (see, e.g., Barbera et al. 2015; Gonzalez-Bailon et al.
2011; Gonzalez-Bail6n and Wang 2016), our data provide
a rare window into the relationship between fine-grained
network features and offline protest participation.

Our data set contains 764 people whose geolocation
reveals that they were a participant in the Paris protest.
Our data set also includes a set of 764 people who were
tweeting about Charlie Hebdo in the same way as those
who participated, but who were elsewhere in Paris during
the protest. The latter serves as a baseline for controlled
comparisons of protesters and similar nonprotesters. Furthermore, we collect full social network information measured out to two degrees—every user each of these people
follows on Twitter, and every user each of these users follows. In total, our data set of protesters and nonprotesters,
all users they follow, and all users whom those users follow
contains 129,665,566 Twitter users.

These data provide a snapshot of the networks
of protesters and the networks of nonprotesters who
were similarly interested in the protest issue and eligible to attend. We show that “social theories” of protest
participation—those holding that people influence each
other in their decisions to protest—have implications that
are testable with snapshots of networks like these. If social theories explain protest decisions well, the precise way

‘Although some studies include coarse measures of a social network feature, such as respondents’ estimates of the number of their
friends who participated (Opp and Gern 1993) or the level of support received from certain tie types (McAdam and Paulsen 1993),
the onerous data requirements have severely limited the study of
social network structure in protest participation with offline data.

Online social media have become standard tools of twenty-firstcentury protesters (Tufekci and Freelon 2013). In the case of Charlie
Hebdo, the slogan “Je Suis Charlie” became the worldwide statement of solidarity; that slogan originated on Twitter. By 72 hours
after the massacre, the hashtag #JeSuisCharlie had appeared in
over 5 million tweets (Goldman and Pagliery 2015).

691

that protesters are interconnected would be different from
the way that similar nonprotesters are interconnected.

We begin by distilling social theories of protest to
a simple premise: A person is more likely to attend a
protest if she is exposed to closer social contacts who are
also likely to attend the protest. We then show that ifin the
run-up toa protest social contacts positively influence one
another to protest in this way, then there are observable
implications for the structure of networks in data such
as ours. The networks interconnecting protesters should
look different from the networks interconnecting similar
people who did not protest. In networks measured out
two degrees, the differences should manifest not just in
the number of ties to one another, but also in the extent
of indirect, triadic, and reciprocated ties that are present
in each network. Comparing networks serves as a largescale empirical test: Finding no such differences would
cast doubt on social theories of protest.

In fact, we find that all expected differences between
the protester and the comparison networks are present,
significant, and large in magnitude. Our results are consistent with social theories of protest behavior in which
highly motivated individuals influence those most exposed to them socially. Interpreted in the context of Twitter, a person is more likely to attend a protest if she follows
people who are motivated to attend, follows people who
follow people who are motivated, follows a member of
a small clique who is motivated, and follows motivated
people who mutually follow the user in return.

This article makes three broad contributions to the
study of protest. First, it offers the first characterization
of a network among protesters measured beyond egocentric networks, which allows us to capture structural
features beyond degree. This network is significantly different from the network among a baseline set of people
in the same area with similar interest in the protest issue. Second, it translates existing theory of the role of
networks in protest into hypotheses testable with crosssectional social media data. We are able to move beyond
offline studies that show some protesters have friends who
protest, and online studies that show online ties relate to
online behavior, to show that the full set of Twitter ties
among real-world protest participants is interconnected
in ways that are consistent with an influence-by-exposure
process. Third, our approach of collecting data from online social media, assembling a baseline set for comparison, and utilizing nonparametric statistical methods and
tools from social network analysis is novel and easily replicable for other twenty-first-century protests. Our hope is
that this article will pave the way for a reinvigorated empirical investigation of social networks’ role in individual
protest participation.692

In the next section, we situate our contribution within
the theoretical, offline empirical, and online empirical
literatures concerning networks and protests. The third
section gives an overview of our approach, highlighting
steps we take to allay selection concerns. The fourth section presents a theory of protest used to derive hypotheses about network structure from standard assumptions
about protest behavior. The subsequent section presents
our data, results, and robustness checks, and the last section concludes.

The Role of Network Structure in
Protest

Social networks have the potential to affect protest behavior because individuals may influence each other. Links in
a social network serve as channels of information and peer
pressure. Different network structures—arrangements of
links—may be more conducive to this influence, and
hence to protests.

Traditional approaches to the study of protest participation stipulate the way that people decide to protest
based on others in the network, and then derive the network structures most favorable to protest. One set of theories draws heavily on epidemiological models to represent
influence, holding that individuals can “infect” each other
with the desire to protest in an analogue to disease spread
(Eguiluz and Klemm 2002; Goldenberg, Libai, and Muller
2001; Marwell, Oliver, and Prahl 1988), or via a more
complex process that depends on the extent of exposure
(Centola 2013; Centola and Macy 2007; Siegel 2009).

Another set of theories accounts for variance in how
susceptible people are to others’ influence. Whatever
its source, this variance can be represented as personal
“thresholds” that must be met before people are willing
to protest: A person is only willing if enough others in
total (Granovetter 1978; Macy 1991) or in her network
neighborhood (Chwe 2000; Watts 2002) do so as well.

These approaches share two assumptions about
protest decision making. First, in general, social ties to
others who are likely to protest increase a person’s propensity to protest. Second, the quality of ties matters. Ties
must be “wide” enough to transmit social reinforcement (Centola and Macy 2007) or “strong” enough in a
Granovetter (1973) sense to convey credible information
(Chwe 2000; Siegel 2009). The model we present in the
fourth section adapts these two assumptions to the context of Twitter. Despite the rich theory for why network
structure should affect protests, large hurdles to collecting
the appropriate data have limited empirical tests in both
the offline and online domains.

JENNIFER M. LARSON ET AL.

Offline Studies of the Role of Social Ties in
Protests

Although precisely measuring networks is a difficult,
error-prone, and expensive task in general, doing so in the
context of protests is particularly challenging. The biggest
hurdles are identifying participants after the fact; tracking them down to survey them; eliciting reliable network
information after-the-fact; and learning about enough of
their ties, and enough about each of their ties, to answer
meaningful questions about the role of network structure in their decision to participate. These problems are
compounded when the protest was sensitive or attained
notoriety—memory can be colored by ex post social judgment (Opp and Gern 1993, 665).

Most empirical work studying networks and protest
using offline data documents the existence of ties between
a small number of participants and other participants (see
Oliver 1984; Snow, Zurcher, and Ekland-Olson 1980).
Even the most comprehensive offline network studies of
protest have been limited to a small subset of ties without
record of interconnections among them for a small number of participants. McAdam and Paulsen (1993) use enrollment lists from the 1964 Mississippi Freedom Sumer
Project to target respondents, receiving responses from
340 participants and individuals who withdrew. Questionnaires inquired about the existence of five relationship types and respondents’ perceived level of support
from each.

Opp and Gern (1993) collected data on social ties
among a subset of participants and nonparticipants in
the 1989 Leipzig rebellion in the German Democratic Republic. Since there are no enrollment lists in a protest,
to identify some of the 70,000 participants in the 1989
demonstration, the authors surveyed 1,300 of the 450,000
residents of Leipzig in late 1990. Respondents were asked
whether they participated in the protest and about the
existence of ties to colleagues and friends. Questions were
of the form “how close were your ties to your colleagues”
(on a 4-point scale), “how many of your colleagues criticized the situation in the GDR,” and “how many of your
colleagues attended peace prayers, demonstrations and
similar activities?” (Opp and Gern 1993, 673).

Both studies establish that, among the subset sampled, the existence of a tie recalled after the fact to a
protest participant is associated with participation, and
that the stronger the tie, the greater the association. Although these are important findings, they leave much
unanswered about the role of networks in protest participation. Do those who protest have ties to other protesters
because they have more ties in general, or because these
ties were used to encourage participation? Do friends ofSOCIAL NETWORKS AND PROTEST PARTICIPATION

friends have any effect? If someone belongs to a clique
containing a participant, is she more likely to participate?
Is the network structure among protesters different from
the network structure among similar people who could
have protested? Our unusually rich data allow us to tackle
these questions, and others like them, for the first time.

The Promising Era of Online Social Media

Online social media offer unprecedented data opportunities for the study of protest behavior. Platforms like Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram are online spaces where
individuals create and share content like messages and
photos. These platforms are “social” in that users officially
establish other users as their contacts; these connections
give privileged access to content and are observable to
researchers. Online social media are widely used by participants in protests to coordinate, organize, inform, and
report (Steinert-Threlkeld et al. 2015; Tufekci and Freelon
2013), and in general these observable online ties can be
used as valid measures of offline social contacts (Bisbee
and Larson 2017).

Because our Charlie Hebdo protest data are from
Twitter, they have advantages over self-reported data.
First, our sample is more comprehensive. Because we did
not use long, costly surveys, we have data on a large set
of protesters and nonprotesters. Second, the record of behavior was generated in real time, freeing our data of potentially large recall and social desirability biases. Third,
our measure of the social network is rich. The network is
observable, behaviorally verified, and complete on Twitter: We know everyone to whom someone is connected, all
of their connections, and any connections among them.
Finally, and an advantage over many online studies as well,
our data contain the precise geo-coordinates of the user
at the time of the activity. This offers a measure of realworld behavior, confirming presence at the protest site,
again freeing us from reliance on self-reported measures
of behavior that can be contaminated by social desirability
bias and other confounders.

This article joins a burgeoning research area using
online social media to study protests, much of which focuses on the tactics, coordination, and timing of protests
(for an overview, see Tufekci and Freelon 2013). Research
exploring the role of network structure in protest behavior
using online social media data is rarer.

The few exceptions focus on the role of network
structure in online protest behavior. Gonzalez-Bailon
et al. (2011) consider the relationship between network
position and Twitter message-sending activity during a
monthlong window containing 2011 protests in Spain.

693

Barbera et al. (2015) find that those in peripheral network positions played an important role in the wide reach
of messages on Twitter about Istanbul’s Taksim Gezi Park
protest in 2013 and the United for Global Change demonstration in 2012. Gonzalez-Bail6n and Wang (2016) find
that networks that spread messages on Twitter are fragmented, and certain network positions are essential to the
wide reach of tweets. These findings, while important, are
limited to explaining online behavior: creating and sharing messages on Twitter. Our interest extends beyond who
talks about a protest on Twitter to who physically attends.

Steinert-Threlkeld (2017) also relates Twitter activity to offline behavior; the study uses a database of
13 million tweets to argue that peripheral members of
a network are more influential in mobilizing a protest
than central members are because they provide a more
credible signal of the low costs of protest. This study,
like ours, uses geocoded tweets to measure real-world
participation. However, the network among participants
is measured coarsely—for each user, only the number of
followers on Twitter is recorded. Since no connections between ties, or ties beyond a single degree, are measured,
no information on the structure of the network beyond
degree can be explored.

Our unusual data map the networks of protesters
and nonprotesters out to two degrees. These networks,
combined with a measure of real-world protest participation, allow us to test hypotheses about the precise role
of network structure in protest participation.

Overview of Our Data and Approach

Our data are drawn from the universe of Twitter users
who sent at least one tweet about Charlie Hebdo containing at least one of the following hashtags: #CharlieHebdo, #JeSuisCharlie, #Charlie Hebdo, #JeSuisAhmed, #JeNeSuisPasCharlie, #Beinfait,
and #JeSuisKouachi. Our analyses use two subsets
of these users, which we label “Protesters” and “Comparison Set.” Protesters are all users who sent at least
one tweet containing at least one of the seven hashtags above during the time of the protest that was geotagged to be within the protest site, Paris’s Place de la
République. There are 764 such users. Our comparison
set is a random sample of 764 of the users who were
interested and eligible to participate: They sent at least
one tweet containing at least one of the seven hashtags above during the protest (i.e., Charlie Hebdo was
salient to them) that was geotagged to be in Paris (i.e.,
they were geographically near enough) but more than694

five kilometers away from the protest site.’ Because these
sets only include users who geotag, our analyses rely on
the assumption that the proportion of a user’s neighbors who geotag is not a function of that user’s protest
attendance.*

We measure the full Twitter network for both the
protestors and the comparison set measured out to two
degrees. For each user, we collect the usernames of all
other users whom she follows (her “ties”) and the usernames of all whom these users follow (her “ties of ties”).°
We call this web of following relations constructed for the
protesters the “protester network,” and the same for the
comparison set the “comparison network.”

We collect information on protesters and the comparison set simultaneously because we will seek to detect
traces of influence by exposure among protesters and verify that those traces do not exist when we look for them
in a comparison set of similar users at the same point
in time. In order to know what to look for, the next
main section specifies a simple social theory of protest
that identifies differences in network structure that we
should observe between these two networks if people really do influence each other to attend in the way theory
stipulates.

Assessing the Role of Networks with
Observational Data

Our data on network ties and protest participation are observational. We will show that the way protesters are connected to one another on Twitter is significantly different
from the way that eligible nonprotesters are connected to
one another, and these differences are strongly consistent
with a social theory of people influencing one another to
protest. However, as with any observational study, we are

>We collect our comparison set from Paris to maximize comparability. Although these users sent a tweet from a location more than
five kilometers from the protest during the protest and did not send
a tweet from the protest, it is conceivable that some nonetheless
traveled to the protest. Hence, some in the comparison set may
have actually participated. However, this potential overlap makes
the differences we observe conservative. In Supporting Information
(SI) Section 2.2, we verify all results with an additional comparison
set drawn from France but not Paris.

“Geotagging is an optional account setting, and most tweets are
not geotagged. SI Section 2.4 reports that protesters geotag 11.6%
of tweets, and users in the comparison set geotag 10%. Although
the users who geotag could differ from those who do not, our
comparisons will all be between users who geotag.

“Following” is the basic social relationship on Twitter. If one user
elects to follow another, the home page of the follower will regularly display the other’s Twitter activity. These relationships can be
asymmetric—user a can follow b without b following a.

JENNIFER M. LARSON ET AL.

limited to showing that the data are consistent with the
theory; we cannot be sure that exposure to others in the
network caused participation.

On the one hand, the fact that the networks under
study were not exogenously varied—either by manipulating users’ Twitter experiences or by assigning lab participants to new, artificial networks—limits our ability to
attribute causality. On the other hand, the fact that the
networks we do observe are the real networks used by real
protest participants in their natural setting bolsters our
study’s external validity.

The biggest threat to causality is a selection story: It
could be that people who choose to participate in protests
also select into networks in which they are relatively well
connected to others who choose to participate in the same
protests. In such a case, we could not distinguish whether
selection into the network or influence by exposure explained the differences we observe.

Although there are limits to addressing this issue with
observational data, our strategy is to carefully select the
set of nonprotesters in order to hold constant some key
sources of selection. If protesters and the comparison set
of nonprotesters both have attributes that lead people to
befriend one another and to participate in the Charlie
Hebdo protest, then differences in their networks cannot
be explained by those common attributes.

For example, one potential source of selection is an
interest in politics. If people interested in politics are more
likely to befriend others interested in politics, and if those
interested in politics are more likely to attend the Charlie
Hebdo protest, then we might observe highly interconnected protesters simply due to their shared interest. To
account for this possibility, we assemble the comparison set from users who used the same seven hashtags
about Charlie Hebdo, which ensures that all protesters
and comparison set users were interested in this political
issue. Of course, this still leaves open the possibility that
protesters had a stronger interest than those in the comparison set. However, we can demonstrate that protesters
and those in the comparison set divided their attention
across the seven hashtags similarly, and both sets were
tweeting about Charlie Hebdo at similar rates in the days
leading up to the protest (see SI Section 2.6). To the extent
that these measures capture the character and intensity
of interest in this political issue, the protesters and the
comparison set do not differ.

Furthermore, we consider the possibility that,
although the protesters and the comparison set appear to
be equally interested in this political issue, protesters are
more politically active in general. However, we show that
the protesters and our comparison set follow verified
accounts, which include news media and politicians, atSOCIAL NETWORKS AND PROTEST PARTICIPATION

similar rates (see SI Section 2.6). We also use a latent
Dirichlet allocation decomposition to cluster users based
on the accounts they follow. If politically active users
follow certain political or news accounts more than
nonpolitically active users, and if protesters are systematically more politically active than nonprotesters, then
we should expect to see protesters cluster separately from
nonprotesters. Reassuringly, SI Section 2.5 shows that this
is not the case. By these measures, protesters do not appear more politically active than our set of nonprotesters.
Consequently, if the politically interested and active select
into networks with one another, we should observe a high
extent of interconnectedness among both the protesters
and the comparison set. Insofar as these measures capture
political interest, the differences we observe cannot be
due to selection driven by shared political interest.

Finally, we consider sociable personality traits as a
source of selection. It could be that some people are more
outgoing or gregarious and forge more ties in general.
If this type of person is also more likely to protest, we
might observe more connections among protesters because they form denser networks among themselves and
not because they influenced one another to protest. As
the section “Charlie Hebdo Protest” shows, the protesters
do have more ties and more ties of ties than those in
the comparison set. Consequently, in our analyses, we
will compare groups based on the proportion of their
ties and ties of ties that they have to one another rather
than the raw number of ties within each group, which
will control for this difference. Furthermore, we show
that in the days between the massacre and the protest,
protesters and comparison set users were tweeting (about
anything) at similar rates, and about the protest at similar rates as well (and both were tweeting more frequently, and hence appear more gregarious, than a third
set of users in France that was collected without restriction to any particular hashtag use). To the extent
that gregariousness is captured by tweet volume and
patterns, both groups similarly exhibit this personality
trait.

In short, finding that protesters are substantially
more interconnected than a purely random set of
nonprotesters might be unconvincing because the
protesters may be interconnected due to a shared interest
in politics or outgoing personalities. But by sampling nonprotesters from those who were equally engaged with the
topic of Charlie Hebdo in the same place at the same time,
we hold constant potentially large sources of homophily
and selection. We can be more confident (though still not
sure) that differences we observe between the two similar
groups’ networks are at least in part the by-product of
influence by exposure.

695

Deriving Predictions about Network
Structure from Social Theories of
Protest

In this section, we show that theories holding that people
influence one another in the run-up to a protest have implications for the observed structure of networks among
those who do protest. We specify a simple, social theory of protest participation in order to pin down expectations for network data collected from protesters and
nonprotesters using Twitter.

Our theory distills social theories of protest to a simple premise: Individuals will join a protest if they value
doing so highly enough, and their valuation depends in
part on their exposure to others’ valuations. The greater
the extent to which people are exposed to others who
value the protest highly, the more likely they are to value
the protest highly. The extent of exposure to another’s
protest valuation depends on how socially proximate the
two are—if they are friends, or merely friends of friends,
or friends of friends of friends—and on the strength of
their relationship—if they are close, or if their relationship is less intimate.

We remain agnostic about why exposure matters in
order to capture a wide range of social theories. It could
be that a high valuer actively cajoles her contacts to attend. It could be that she passively signals that attending
would be met with her approval, or is likely to be worthwhile. It could be that her interest drives her to share
information about the protest that convinces her friends.
Our approach detects evidence that exposure in a network matters. We leave an examination of how and why
for future research.°

Our data are drawn from Twitter, a vast network of
ties that are indicative of personal relationships and that
can function as sources of exposure.’ On Twitter, users
can inform others via messages (“tweets”), secondhand
messages (“retweets”), and shared links to web pages.
Users’ activity also conveys something about the users
and the content that they find relevant or endorse. In
this way, ties are windows into the opinions, values, and
intentions of other users. A tweet that says, “Protest in
the Place de la République tomorrow, come if you can!”

°SI Section 2.9 presents the results of human coders classifying the
content of a random subset of protesters’ tweets. Protesters’ tweets
contain a variety of content, including simple logistical details and
exhortations to attend, and contain both explicit and subtle indications of whether a user will attend.

*We use Twitter to measure the underlying social network in which
exposure can take place. Whether the exposure happens on Twitter
or happens in a real-world encounter between the two people who
share a Twitter tie is irrelevant to our approach.696

not only conveys information about the time and location
of a protest, but also suggests to followers that the user
endorses the protest and prefers that others attend.

The next section shows that an influence-byexposure process leading up to a protest results in
protesters who are highly connected to one another directly, indirectly, with reciprocated ties, and as parts of
cliques. A sample of similar nonprotesters would not be
as interconnected in these ways.

Modeling the Decision to Participate
in a Protest

Consider a simple model of protest participation among
a set of individuals N who are situated in a network g.
These individuals base their decision to protest or not in
part on the decisions of others. Suppose that attending a
protest entails some cost so that a person will only participate if she finds joining the protest sufficiently valuable
to offset this cost. Person 7s net valuation, V;, can depend on benefits to herself or to others, and sources of
value can vary across individuals; whereas one may value
attending the protest highly because one expects its outcome to positively impact the world, another may value
attending highly because she expects to win the favor of
her friends who care about the protest. So long as, for
whatever reasons, 7s net valuation is positive, V; > 0, 1
will attend the protest.

Let exposure to others’ valuations depend on two
features of network position: distance and strength. Call
d; ; the network distance between 1 and j: the length of the
shortest path from 7 to j so that d;; = 1 if 7 has a tie to
j, and, following convention, d; ; = oo if there is no path
from 1 to j. Call s;; the strength of the path between 1 and
j such that 0 < s;; < 11, 7 € N where s;; = 0 if there
is no path from to j, s;,; is the strength of the tie between
tand if d;,; = 1, and if dj; > 1, s;,; is the strength of the
weakest tie in the path from i to j.5 Now we can define
one’s exposure to another in a network:

Definition 1 (Exposure). The extent to which individual i
is exposed to individual },

Ey (diz, 545) (1)

is decreasing in network distance dj ; and increasing in path
strength s; ;.

’We present the model in its most general form; in principle, long
paths can affect protest decisions. However, our ability to test arguments about paths here is limited since our data contain paths
of length at most two. Path strength defined as the strength of the
path’s weakest link means that strong ties can transmit information better than weak ones, and that the consequences of weak-tie
transmission are permanent.

JENNIFER M. LARSON ET AL.

That is, an individual 7 is more exposed to j if i and j
are closer to each other in the network, and if i and j are
connected by a stronger path. Individual 7’s exposure to j
is greatest when i follows j directly (dj; = 1) and when 1
and js tie is as strong as possible (s;; = 1). Suppose that
Byers =O, Sij) = Oand that Eggl deg, Sij = 0) = Oso
that i has no exposure to j if there is no path from 7 to
j or if the strength of the path from 7 to j is 0. Further
suppose that E;,;(d;,; = 2, s;,; > 0) > 0 so that indirect
ties generate positive exposure as long as neither tie in the
path from ito j has zero strength.

Nowwe can specify the way a person’s net valuation of
the protest depends on her exposure to other individuals:

Definition 2 (Protest Valuation). An individual 1’s valuation of a protest, V;, is a function of 1’s exposure to others
and their valuations. Let H = {1...n} be the subset of individuals in N such that V, > 0 V h € H. These are the
individuals who value the protest highly. Individual 1’s valuation is a function of his exposure to these individuals in
the network,

ViCEre Vey Bap, Vin oo ne Bey, Vin Sas (2)
where j\,..-, Jn €© H, and Z; captures 1’s private reasons

for valuing the protest, independent of the valuations of others.

Recall that when V; > 0, 7 prefers to participate in
the protest. Our key modeling assumption is that V; is
increasing in E;;V; for any j € H.

This assumption means that the more that individual
1is exposed to an individual j who values protesting highly
enough to participate, the higher will be 7’s own valuation
of the protest. In addition, the more an individual j to
whom 7 is exposed values the protest, the higher will 7
value the protest. Since exposure is increasing in network
proximity and tie strength, individuals who have strong,
direct ties to others who value protesting highly will value
the protest especially highly.'®

’Our theory leaves much unspecified about the dynamic process
by which individuals form their initial valuation and update over
the time period leading up to the protest. Our interest is simply in
positing a minimal set of assumptions that capture broad intuitions
of existing theory.

‘It is conceivable that for particularly controversial or high-risk
protests, there could also be some trying to influence others not to
attend. In such a case, so long as there are also some with moderate viewpoints, the comparisons between protesters and others
that we derive hold. It is also conceivable that, for more partisan
protests, the effect of exposure may vary with the party affiliation
of the source. Since Charlie Hebdo was not a particularly partisan issue in France, we leave an exploration of this possibility for
future research.SOCIAL NETWORKS AND PROTEST PARTICIPATION

Network Hypotheses

If a process with the features laid out above was at play
when people were deciding whether or not to protest,
what should we expect to observe when we measure a
network among a set of individuals who actually participated in a protest?

Our hypotheses make use of some network notation.
We use the convention 47 € g to mean that a directed tie
from ito jis present in the network g. To refer to everyone
to whom 1 is tied in g, 7s “neighborhood,” we will write
N;(g). That is,

Ni(g) = {jly € g}. (3)

The neighborhood of 7 is the set of all other individuals
to whom 1is tied in g; these are called 7’s “neighbors.” On
Twitter, this is the set of everyone whom 7 follows. Likewise, we can define the set of 7s ties of ties accordingly:

N?(g) = {ild(i, 7) = 2}. (4)

N?(g) is the set of all individuals to whom i is connected in a path through the network of length two. On
Twitter, this is the set of individuals that those whom 1
follows follow.

Now we can consider the first of the two inputs to
exposure, network distance.

Network Distance Hypotheses. The hypotheses are
stated in terms of a set of individuals who are observed to
participate in a protest, P, and a set of individuals who are
observed to not participate in a protest, C. The network
that includes all ties and ties of ties of everyone in P will
be called g”; the network that includes all ties and ties of
ties of everyone in Cwill be called g©. We present the intuition underlying each hypothesis here; the supporting
information contains the formal derivation of each (SI
Sections 1.1—1.6).

In our theory, the key assumption is that high exposure to individuals who value the protest highly increases
one’s valuation of protest, and high enough valuation
results in a person actually participating in the protest.
When we observe a set of individuals who did participate
in a protest, we know that at the conclusion of this process, they must have valued the protest highly enough.
Although we cannot know which of the protesters influenced which other of the protesters to attend during the
process that led to the protest, ifinfluence by exposure was
at play, then protesters should occupy network positions
that are highly exposed to one another. Individuals in P
should be more exposed to each other in g’ compared to
the extent to which individuals in C are exposed to each

697

other in g©. In other words, protesters should cluster in
the network."

Since exposure Ej; is decreasing in dj ;, the first hypothesis holds that protesters should cluster with respect
to direct ties. We formulate a strong version of this hypothesis that compares the proportion, rather than the
number, of ties. On average, a protester’s neighborhood
should contain a greater share of ties to other protesters
when compared to the share of an eligible nonprotester’s
ties to other sampled nonprotesters. Specifically, we
expect

lL a#tilie P. i € M(g”)}
#P 44 #jlj € Ni(g?)}

Typ AilicGieNe
tC HGF E ND)

which is our first hypothesis:

H1: On average, the proportion of each protester’s
ties that are to other protesters in g? is greater
than the proportion of each eligible nonprotester’s ties that are to other eligible nonprotesters in g© (Inequality 5).

Similarly, since Ej j(dj,; = 2, s;,; > 0) > 0, individuals are also exposed to others’ valuations via indirect
connections, their ties of ties. We should also observe a
relatively high degree of interconnectedness via ties of ties
among the protesters. Specifically,

1 #Hilj € P, 7 € N2(g?)}
»

 

 

 

= 2( oP

#P a HILT E Ni(")}
Lp Ailie CG je Ng} 6)
#C A AIG E NPQ}

This can be stated as the following hypothesis:

H2: On average, the proportion of each protester’s
ties of ties to other protesters in g’ is greater than
the proportion of each eligible nonprotesters’ ties

of ties that are to other eligible nonprotesters in

g®.

''The derivation of our hypotheses accounts for the way our data
were collected. Consider the universe of people eligible to attend
the protest. The protesters were selected from this universe because
they participated. The comparison set was selected at random from
the remainder of this universe. Influence by exposure would result
in correlated valuations of the protest and hence attendance in the
network. Selecting on participation would result in a set of highly
interconnected users. Selecting from a large universe of eligible
users at random would not. If instead social ties do not influence
one another, selecting on participation should look roughy like
selecting eligible participants at random from the network.698

These hypotheses capture the intuition that if exposure via ties and ties of ties mattered to protest decisions,
then individuals who did in fact protest should hold positions in the underlying Twitter network in which they
were highly exposed to one another via ties and ties of ties.

Tie Strength Hypotheses. Since exposure via strong ties
is more impactful, by the same reasoning as above, we
expect protesters to have more strong ties to each other
compared to eligible nonprotesters.

Tie strength cannot be directly measured on Twitter.
We use two proxies for the attributes such as intimacy and
trust thought to underly strength (see Gilbert and Karahalios 2009). Both reduce a potentially continuous measure s;; to a binary variable taking two values, “strong”
and “weak.”

In the first operationalization, we consider the arrangement of ties among triads. In particular, given that i
follows both jand k, we assume that 7's ties to both j and k
are stronger if j and k themselves share a tie. The triangle
formed by i, j, and kis one measure ofa strong relationship
between each pair, perhaps indicative of shared attributes
or membership in a close-knit social clique (Granovetter
1973). On Twitter, this means that a user’s tie to someone she follows is stronger if there is a second person she
follows and at least one of the two follows the other.

To simplify notation, let 7k € g mean jj € g, ik € g,
and either jk € g or kj € g. Then we expect

1 Hike g?|j © Porke P}
> Lp
#P <= #{ijk € g?P}
1 #ijk € g°|j e Corke C}
#C #{ijk € go}
In words, our next hypothesis is the following:

(7)

H3: The average proportion of protesters’ triangles that contain at least one other protester
is larger than the average proportion of eligible nonprotesters’ triangles that contain at
least one other of these eligible nonprotesters
(Inequality 7).

If triangles comprise a person’s strong ties, then the
proportion of a person’s triangles that entail a protester
is a rough measure of the proportion of a person’s strong
ties that are connections to protesters. We also capture
this value a second way, operationalized with reciprocity.
A tie is considered strong if it is reciprocated and weak if

"24 binary measure magnifies contrast. We encourage future work,
especially using data with paths longer than length two, to consider more categories of strength in order to unpack the role of
relationship quality.

JENNIFER M. LARSON ET AL.

TABLE 1 Network Attributes for Protesters and
Paris Comparison Set

 

 

Protesters Comparison § t-stat

Mean # ties 833 (2,491) 418 (590) 4,5

Mean # ties of ties 134,623 85,830 18.6
(52,780) (49,864)

Mean # reciprocated 471 (1,989) 113 (416) 4.9

Mean transitivity 0.098 (0.053) 0.108 (0.071) —3.2

 

Note: Standard deviations are in parentheses. The t-statistic tests the
null hypothesis that attributes for protesters and the comparison set
are the same. The distributions of the number of ties and transitivity
have long right tails; the null can be rejected with high statistical
confidence for the log-transformed distributions as well (t-statistic
11.6 and 14.9, respectively).

it is not (see Friedkin 1980). On Twitter, this means that
a tie to someone a person follows is strong if that person
follows her in return and weak otherwise.

Influence by exposure implies that protesters have
more reciprocated ties among one another than eligible
nonprotesters have among one another:

1 wpa .. ;
ap Hilfe g” jie g”, je P}>

ieP

1 bas 3 :
qo DHilie gS jie 8% J € Ch. (8)
1EC

This becomes our final hypothesis:

H4: The number of ties in g” that are between individuals in P and reciprocated is larger than the
number of ties in g that are between individuals
in Cand reciprocated (Inequality 8).

Charlie Hebdo Protest

The Charlie Hebdo protest took place on January 11,
2015, in Paris’s Place de la République. The protester
network we analyze, g’, centered around the 764 individuals geotagged to be present at the protest and measured out two degrees, contains 93,009,971 distinct nodes.
On average, each protester has 833 ties and 134,623 ties
of ties. The comparison network, centered around 764
nonparticipants and measured out two degrees, contains
a total of 106,116,658 nodes, with 418 ties and 85,830 ties
of ties on average. Table 1 compares summary statistics
for the two networks.”

‘Although there exist other network-level statistics, they require
precise measurement of the absence ofa link between any two nodesSOCIAL NETWORKS AND PROTEST PARTICIPATION

699

FiGuRE 1 Distribution of the Number of Ties per User

Protesters and Paris Comparison

Protesters
— ___ (max: 63,784)

Paris Comp.
ose (max: 6,740)

0 20,000 40,000 60,000

Number of Ties

 

Zoomed In

Protesters
Paris Comp.

0 500 1,500 2,500

Number of Ties

 

Note: The left panel shows the distribution of the number of ties per user in the set of protesters
and the Paris comparison set. The right panel shows the same, zoomed in on the mode. Vertical

lines indicate the distributions’ means.

FIGURE 2 Distribution of the Number of Ties of
Ties per User in the Set of Protesters
and the Paris Comparison Set

Protesters and Paris Comparison

 

—Protesters
---Paris Comp.

  

 

 

 

0 50,000 100,000 150,000

Ties of Ties

200,000 250,000 300,000

Note: Vertical lines indicate the distributions’ means.

Protesters have more ties and ties of ties than
individuals in the comparison set. These distributions
are displayed in Figures 1 and 2. Note that this will
make support for Hypotheses 1 and 2, which pertain to

in the network. An egocentric network measured out two degrees
cannot detect links between individuals included as ties of ties of
the egos. Hence, statistics like diameter and centrality measures
other than degree are not meaningful here.

proportions of these quantities, conservative. Protesters
also have a larger number of reciprocated ties, and lower
transitivity.'* These characteristics imply that protesters
occupy positions of high reach within the Twitter
network. Although these individuals would have the
greatest exposure to initial high valuers who, according
to Gonzalez-Bailén et al. (2011), tend to be scattered
roughly randomly throughout a network, we leave future
exploration of the timing and dynamics of influence for
future investigation. Now we turn to our hypothesis tests.

Assessing Support for Hypotheses

We present the main results of our hypothesis tests here,
with additional analyses and robustness checks in the
supporting information.

Support for Network Distance Hypotheses. First we
consider the hypotheses that pertain to ties and ties of
ties. Hypotheses 1 and 2 hold that since exposure is greatest when ties are direct, and still positive for ties of ties,
if protesters influenced one another via these channels,

'4Network transitivity measures the frequency of triangles—threeperson cliques—in the network. The reported value is the average
node’s ratio of number of three-person cliques to total possible
three-person cliques.700

JENNIFER M. LARSON ET AL.

TABLE 2 Assessing the Network Distance Hypotheses

 

 

Protesters Comparison t-statistic Support
H1: Prop. ties within 0.0040 (0.0063) 0.0004 (0.0017) 15.0 [log: 11.0] Y
H2: Prop. ties of ties within 0.0332 (0.0332) 0.0057 (0.0080) 22.2 [log: 35.0] Y

 

Note: Standard deviations are in parentheses, and the t-statistic tests the null that values for protesters and the comparison set are the same.
The t-statistic on log-transformed data appears in square brackets. Both hypotheses are supported with high statistical confidence.

they should be highly interconnected in terms of these
features. We expect to observe many ties and ties of ties
connecting protesters to one another, and this value should
be greater for g? than for g°.

Table 2 summarizes the results of comparisons between protesters and those in the Paris comparison set.
The network among protesters exhibits features consistent with both hypotheses: g” and g“ differ substantially
in the expected direction.

A larger proportion of protesters’ ties are to other
protesters than the proportion of eligible nonprotesters’
ties are to one another in the comparison set (row 1).
Protesters also have many more ties of ties to one another than the eligible nonprotesters of the comparison
set have to one another (row 2). Both comparisons are
highly statistically significant and robust to a correc
tion for the long right tail. The SI (Section 2) shows
that the comparisons are also robust to excluding verified Twitter accounts, excluding outliers, and using a
different comparison set drawn from a larger geographic
area.

Figure 3 shows the distribution of the proportion of
ties within each group, zoomed in to better show the
mass of the distribution. The plot on the right highlights just how many more individuals in the comparison set have no ties to others in the comparison set.
Over 80% of the eligible nonparticipants in the Paris
comparison set have no ties to others in that set, compared to less than 40% of participants who have no ties to
other participants. Consistent with Hypothesis 1, those
who protest are much more likely to be directly connected to others who protest, even as a share of their

FiGurE 3 Distribution of the Proportion of Ties within Each Group,

Zoomed In

 

Protesters
— (max: 0.11)

Paris Comp.
--- (max: 0.03)

Density

 

0.000 0.004 0.008 0.012

Proportion Ties within Group

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

aa

Paris Comp.

0.0

Protesters

Proportion Respondents with Zero Ties Within

Note: The left panel shows the distribution of the proportion of protesters’ ties
to other protesters and the distribution of the proportion of users’ ties in the
Paris comparison set to others in the Paris comparison set. Vertical lines show
the distributions’ means. The right panel shows the proportion of each sample with zero ties to others within the sample. Strong support is indicated for

Hypothesis 1.SOCIAL NETWORKS AND PROTEST PARTICIPATION

701

FiGurE4 Distribution of the Proportion of Ties of Ties among Each

Group, Zoomed In

 

Protesters
— _ (max: 0.27)

Paris Comp.
--- (max: 0.07)

Density

¢

 

 

0.00 0.04 0.08 0.12

Proportion Ties of Ties within Group

0.05 010 0.15 0.20 0.25

0.00

 

Note: The left panel shows the distribution of the proportion of protesters’ ties of ties to other
protesters and the distribution of the proportion of users’ ties of ties in the Paris comparison
set to others in the Paris comparison set. Vertical lines show the distributions’ means. The right
panel shows the boxplot for both distributions. Strong support is indicated for Hypothesis 2.

total links (which, recall from the last section, is larger for
protesters).

Figure 4 shows the distribution of the proportion
of ties of ties among each group, again zoomed in. The
plot on the right displays the distribution as a box plot.
Even though the protesters have more ties of ties on Twitter overall, a larger proportion of their ties of ties is to
other protesters compared to the proportion of eligible
nonprotesters’ ties of ties that are to one another.

These results are strongly consistent with an
influence-by-exposure process on Twitter that functioned
as follows: Individuals who followed people who valued
the protest highly, and who followed people who followed
people who valued the protest highly were influenced to
value the protest highly and ultimately attend. Consequently, those who attended the Charlie Hebdo protest
have a larger share of their ties and ties of ties to other
protesters compared to the share of ties and ties of ties

TABLE 3 Assessing the Tie Strength Hypotheses

that a sample of eligible nonprotesters have to others in
that sample.

Support for Tie Strength Hypotheses. Since exposure is
theorized to be increasing in tie strength, we expect to
observe more strong ties among protesters than among a
comparison set of eligible nonprotesters.

Hypothesis 3 regards ties to be stronger when they are
“triadic,” or part of a triangle—when two of a person’s
ties themselves share a tie. Hypothesis 4 regards ties to
be stronger when they are reciprocated. Table 3 shows
that, by both measures, protesters have more strong ties
to other protesters than individuals in the comparison set
have to others in the comparison set.

Specifically, the first row of Table 3 shows that a much
larger proportion of protesters’ triangles in g” entail another protester compared to the proportion of eligible
nonprotesters’ triangles in g© that entail another in this

 

 

Protesters Comparison t-statistic Support
H3: Prop. triangles within 0.0107 (0.0150) 0.0013 (0.0055) 16.1 [log: 8.5] Y
HA4: # Recip. within 3.08 (5.77) 0.18 (0.67) 13.8 [log: 14.0] Y

 

Note: Standard deviations are in parentheses, and the t-statistic tests the null hypothesis that attributes for protesters and the comparison set are the same. The t-statistic on log-transformed data is shown in square brackets. Both hypotheses are supported with high
statistical confidence.702

JENNIFER M. LARSON ET AL.

FicurE5 Distributions of Individuals’ Triangles That Entail
Another in the Relevant Set

 

Protesters
— (max: 0.12)

Paris Comp.
222 (max: 0.08)

Density

 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04
Prop. Triangles Within Group

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

al

Protesters

0.0

Paris Comp.

Prop. with Zero Triangles Within

Note: The left panel shows the distribution of the proportion of protesters’ triangles that
entail at least one other protester, and the distribution of the proportion of individuals in the
Paris comparison set’s triads that entail at least one other in that set. Vertical lines show the
distributions’ means. The right panel shows the proportion of respondents with no triangles
that entail anyone else in the relevant set. Strong support is indicated for Hypothesis 3.

set. Figure 5 shows the distributions of individuals’ triangles that entail another in the relevant set, the set of
protesters or the set of eligible nonprotesters. The bar
graph on the right shows that over 70% of nodes have no
triangles that include another in their reference group for
the comparison set, whereas fewer than 40% have none
in the protester set.

The second row of Table 3 shows that, on average,
protesters have about three reciprocated ties to other
protesters, whereas for members of the comparison set,
only about 1 out of 5 people have a single reciprocated
tie to someone else in the comparison set. Figure 6 shows
the distributions of reciprocated ties present in both
networks for reference on the left, and the incidence
of reciprocated ties among the set of protesters and the
Paris comparison set of eligible nonprotesters on the
right.

Once again, both hypotheses pertaining to tie
strength are strongly supported by our data. These results are consistent with a process by which individuals
decide whether to protest based in part on their exposure to others: If a person follows someone who values
the protest highly and follows him in return, or follows
someone who values the protest highly within a tight-knit
clique, that person is more likely to protest. This process
would result in many more strong ties among a set of
individuals who turned up to protest than among a com
parison set of eligible nonprotesters, which is precisely
what we see for the Charlie Hebdo protest.

Robustness

In this section, we address potential concerns with our
interpretation of the results. Here, we describe the main
analyses we perform to alleviate concerns; the details
and additional analyses can be found in the supporting
information.

The results presented above compare protesters with
nonprotesters. We select the nonprotesters from Paris.
Twitter networks may differ when users are drawn from
vastly different levels of geographic dispersion. Our hope
is that Paris is roughly the correct level of resolution for
both sets.

We could be wrong in one of two directions. Paris
could be too small a pool from which to draw our comparison set, or it could be too large. If drawing from a
pool of the incorrect size mechanically introduces differences between our protesters and the comparison set,
then the differences we attribute to network influence by
exposure may in fact be artifacts of constructing the comparison set. To ensure that our results are not driven by
a comparison set drawn from too small a pool, we construct a second comparison set, which we call the “FranceSOCIAL NETWORKS AND PROTEST PARTICIPATION

FIGURE 6 Reciprocated Ties

Prop. Reciprocated Ties

Protesters
— (max: 1)

Paris Comp.
--- (max: 0.99)

0.0 0.5 1.0

 

703

Number of Recip. Ties Within

Protesters
— (max: 42)

Paris Comp.
--- (max: 8)

4
4
4
4
4
4
4
‘
‘
4
{
'
'
'
t
i
i
é
t
é
:
e
:
%
fa
‘
6

 

Note: The left panel shows the distribution of the proportion of respondents’ ties that are
reciprocated. The right panel shows the distribution of the number of respondents’ reciprocated
ties that are to another member in the relevant set—protesters or the Paris comparison set.
Vertical lines show the distributions’ means. Strong support is indicated for Hypothesis 4.

Comparison Set.” We construct this set from users who
were geolocated to be in France in the week following the
protest irrespective of whether they used one of the seven
Charlie Hebdo hashtags. We repeat all analyses comparing
the protesters to this comparison set, and comparing the
two comparison sets to each other (see SI Section 2.2).

The results are reassuring in two ways. First, all of
the differences between the protesters and a comparison
set hold when the France comparison set is substituted
in. Second, in all cases, the Paris and the France comparison sets are much more similar to each other—often
statistically indistinguishable—than either is to the set of
protesters. This further corroborates our claim that the
set of protesters is meaningfully different because of the
process that drove individuals to protest, and not because
of the geographic size from which it was drawn.

Of course, it is also possible that Paris was too large
a pool from which to draw our comparison set if, by
sampling individuals who tweeted from the Place de la
République during the protest, we picked up a set of individuals who were from a very small geographic area,
one smaller than the geographic area spanned by individuals drawn from all of Paris. To address this, we construct a measure of the mobility of any Twitter user in our
protester set and calculate the same for users in the Paris
comparison set. It turns out that protesters are at least as
mobile as those in the Paris comparison set: In the lifetime of their Twitter accounts, they have sent tweets from

places as least as geographically dispersed as the those in
the comparison set.

Furthermore, although over 80 million tweets were
geocoded to be in France between January 14, 2015, and
September 14, 2015, a window of time after and excluding
the protest date, exactly zero were located at the protest
site. Hence, those who tweeted from this site during the
protest were visiting a small geographic area for the purpose of protesting, but they are unlikely to reside in it.

An additional concern is that some ties on Twitter
are to other users who may not be the sources of personal influence to which our theory pertains. These users
—celebrities, news sites, and so on—are categorized as
“Verified Accounts” on Twitter. To be sure that our results are not artifacts of ties to these accounts, we repeat
all of the above analyses with the subset of our data that
excludes verified accounts. All results continue to hold
(see SI Section 2.3).

We could also worry that something about the geolocation setting is driving the difference between networks among protesters and networks among those in
the comparison sets. However, first note that all users in
the protest and both comparison sets are included in the
sample because they had geolocation activated. Therefore,
differences between users who geolocate and users who
do not geolocate cannot drive the differences we observe
(though knowing more about these differences would
help establish to what extent we can generalize from our704

findings). For geolocation behavior to be a problem for
our results, it would have to be the case that attending not
only affects a user’s propensity to geolocate, but also that
attending with a Twitter follower makes both users more
likely to decide to geolocate compared to their propensity
to geolocate when not attending a protest. Although we
are not convinced that this behavior is plausible, we further rule it out by measuring the quantity of geolocated
tweets by each user in our samples. Overall, the quantity of geolocated tweets is similar across all three of our
samples (see SI Section 2.4).

Finally, we could worry that individuals are not actually exposed to the protest valuations or intentions of their
social ties. While exposure may take place on Twitter or in
real-world interactions, we only have a record of Twitter
interactions. As a simple verification check, we randomly
selected 200 protesters from our data and collected all
tweets they sent between the massacre and the protest.
We created a replica of their accounts that their followers
would have had access to (SI Figure 27 shows an example) and asked French speakers to classify the content.
Approximately 44% of users tweeted specifically about
the upcoming protest (as opposed to the issue of Charlie
Hebdo, which 100% of users in our sample necessarily
mentioned with at least a hashtag). Additionally, without
being told that all users eventually attended, coders suspected that 64% were at least as likely as even chance to
attend. Given that people could have been exposed offline
as well, this simple validation reassures us that people had
ample opportunity to be exposed to their social contacts’
attitudes toward the upcoming Charlie Hebdo protest.

Conclusion

Using a novel data set that records both real-world participation in a protest and fine-grained social network information, we offer the first large-scale empirical support for
a claim that theory has long hinted should be true: Individuals are influenced by one another in social networks
when deciding whether to participate in protests.

Our approach distills existing theory into a simple
model of protest participation from which we derive hypotheses about network structure. If exposure to people
who value the protest increases a person’s propensity to
protest, and if exposure is a function of network proximity and tie strength, then the observed social networks
among protest participants should look different from the
observed social networks among a sample of people who
were interested and eligible to participate in the protest
but did not.

JENNIFER M. LARSON ET AL.

Indeed, the networks among those who participated in the 2015 Charlie Hebdo protest in Paris differ
significantly from the networks among individuals in
Paris for whom Charlie Hebdo was equally salient but
who did not participate. The large differences are strongly
consistent with soccial theories of influence by exposure:
Individuals who participated in the Charlie Hebdo protest
are more likely than nonparticipants to be connected to
one another via direct ties. Moreover, protesters are also
more likely to be connected to one another via indirect,
reciprocated, and triadic ties, offering support for an even
stronger claim that the way ties are arranged—the network structure—matters for protest behavior.

Taken together, these results suggest that someone
connected by strong, direct ties to people highly motivated to participate in a protest is more likely to participate herself than someone occupying a network position
farther away from, or connected with weaker ties to, others intent on protesting. Because our evidence includes
verified, real-world participation in a protest and social
ties that were observed rather than self-reported, we believe this is the most powerful support to date for the
claim that networks play a meaningful role in individuals’ protest participation.

Of course, much work remains to understand the
process by which an individual comes to protest. With
these large network differences established, future work
can delve deeper into the presence and possible mechanisms of influence, and the strength of our findings highlights the promise of using Twitter data as one of the tools
to do so. Replicating this study for protests that are riskier
or more partisan will help determine the scope of our
findings, establishing when participation by social contacts is a strategic complement and when it might be a
strategic substitute (Cantoni et al. 2017). By measuring
Twitter networks over time, tracking the addition of new
followers, classifying the content of tweets, and exploiting lifetime Twitter activity and geolocation, researchers
can build an even richer picture of the role of networks
in protest.

References

Barbera, Pablo, Ning Wang, Richard Bonneau, John T. Jost,
Jonathan Nagler, Joshua Tucker, and Sandra GonzalezBailon. 2015. “The Critical Periphery in the Growth of Social
Protests.” PLOS ONE 10(11): e0143611.

Bisbee, James, and Jennifer M. Larson. 2017. “Testing Social
Science Network Theories with Online Network Data: An
Evaluation of External Validity.” American Political Science
Review 111(3): 502-21.SOCIAL NETWORKS AND PROTEST PARTICIPATION

Cantoni, Davide, David Y. Yang, Noam Yuchtman, and
Y. Jane Zhang. 2017. “Protests as Strategic Games:
Experimental Evidence from Hong Kong’s Democracy
Movement.” https://goo.gl/aUSqvo.

Centola, Damon M. 2013. “Homophily, Networks, and Critical
Mass: Solving the Start-Up Problem in Large Group Collective Action.” Rationality and Society 25(1): 3—40.

Centola, Damon, and Michael Macy. 2007. “Complex Contagions and the Weakness of Long Ties.” American Journal of
Sociology 113(3): 702-34.

Chwe, Michael Suk-Young,. 2000. “Communication and Coordination in Social Networks.” Review of Economic Studies
67(1): 1-16.

Eguiluz, Victor M., and Konstantin Klemm. 2002. “Epidemic
Threshold in Structured Scale-Free Networks.” Physical Review Letters 89(10): 108701.

Friedkin, Noah. 1980. “A Test of Structural Features of Granovetter’s Strength of Weak Ties Theory.” Social Networks
2(4): 411-22.

Gilbert, Eric, and Karrie Karahalios. 2009. “Predicting Tie
Strength with Social Media.” In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ed. Dan
R. Olsen Jr., Richard B. Arthur, Ken Kinckley, Meredith R.
Morris, Scott Hudson and Saul Greenberg. Boston, MA:
ACM, 211-20.

Goldenberg, Jacob, Barak Libai, and Eitan Muller. 2001. “Talk
of the Network: A Complex Systems Look at the Underlying
Process of Word-of-Mouth.” Marketing Letters 12(3): 21123.

Goldman, David, and Jose Pagliery. 2015. “#JeSuisCharlie
Becomes One of Most Popular Hashtags in Twitter’s
History.” CNN Money, January 9. http://money.cnn.com/
2015/01/09/technology/social/jesuischarlie-hashtag-twitter
/index.html.

Gonzalez-Bailon, Sandra, Javier Borge-Holthoefer, Alejandro
Rivero, and Yamir Moreno. 2011. “The Dynamics of Protest
Recruitment Through an Online Network.” Scientific Reports 1(197): 1-7.

Gonzalez-Bailon, Sandra, and Ning Wang. 2016. “Networked
Discontent: The Anatomy of Protest Campaigns in Social
Media.” Social Networks 44(1): 95-104.

Granovetter, Mark S. 1973. “The Strength of Weak Ties.” American Journal of Sociology 78(1): 1360-80.

Granovetter, Mark S. 1978. “Threshold Models of Collective
Behavior.” American Journal of Sociology 83(1): 1420-43.

Kim, Hyojoung, and Peter S. Bearman. 1997. “The Structure
and Dynamics of Movement Participation.” American Sociological Review 62(1): 70-93.

Macy, Michael W. 1991. “Chains of Cooperation: Threshold
Effects in Collective Action.” American Sociological Review
56(1): 730-47.

Marwell, Gerald, Pamela E. Oliver, and Ralph Prahl. 1988. “Social Networks and Collective Action: A Theory of the Critical
Mass. III.” American Journal of Sociology 94(3): 502-34.

McAdam, Doug, and Ronnelle Paulsen. 1993. “Specifying the
Relationship between Social Ties and Activism.” American
Journal of Sociology 99(3): 640-67.

705

Oliver, Pamela. 1984. “If You Don’t Do It, Nobody Else Will’:
Active and Token Contributors to Local Collective Action.”
American Sociological Review 49(5): 601-10.

Opp, Karl-Dieter, and Christiane Gern. 1993. “Dissident
Groups, Personal Networks, and Spontaneous Cooperation:
The East German Revolution of 1989.” American Sociological
Review 58(5): 659-80.

Siegel, David A. 2009. “Social Networks and Collective Action.”
American Journal of Political Science 53(1): 122-38.

Snow, David A., Louis A. Zurcher Jr., and Sheldon EklandOlson. 1980. “Social Networks and Social Movements: A Microstructural Approach to Differential Recruitment.” American Sociological Review 45(5): 787-801.

Steinert-Threlkeld, Zachary C. 2017. “Spontaneous Collective
Action: Peripheral Mobilization during the Arab Spring.”
American Political Science Review 111(2): 379-403.

Steinert-Threlkeld, Zachary C., Delia Mocanu, Alessandro
Vespignani, and James Fowler. 2015. “Online Social Networks and Offline Protest.” EPJ Data Science 4(1): 1-9.

Tufekci, Zeynep, and Deen Freelon. 2013. “Introduction to the
Special Issue on New Media and Social Unrest.” American
Behavioral Scientist 57(7): 843-47.

Watts, Duncan J. 2002. “A Simple Model of Global Cascades on
Random Networks.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 99(9): 5766—71.

Supporting Information

Additional supporting information may be found online
in the Supporting Information section at the end of the
article.

Appendix 1: Derivation of Hypotheses

Appendix 1.1: Setup and Working Assumptions
Appendix 1.2: Intro to Proofs

Appendix 1.3: Proof of Density Hypothesis

Appendix 1.4: Proof of Hypothesis 1

Appendix 1.5: Proof of Hypothesis 2

Appendix 1.6: Proof of Hypotheses 3 and 4

Appendix 2: Additional Analyses and _ Robustness Checks

Appendix 2.1: Sensitivity of Descriptive Statistics
Appendix 2.2: Robustness to France Comparison Group
Appendix 2.3: Robustness to Omitting Verified Accounts

Appendix 2.4: Mobility and Geolocation

Appendix 2.5: Clustering by Accounts Followed
Appendix 2.6: Potential Baseline Differences

Appendix 2.7: Robustness to Following Protesters in
Both Sets

Appendix 2.8: Did the Protest Cause the Network Ties?
Appendix 2.9: Direct Evidence of Exposure on Twitter